In this video, we're gonna start talking
about string formating in Python.
Now when printing strings and numbers,
it's often gonna be convenient to display
both strings and numbers at the same time,
in a single call to print.
So, for example you might want to
print a description of what the value
is before the value itself.
As you saw, in a previous video,
numbers cannot be canonated or
appended with strings using
the plus operator, because
the presence of that number instructs
Python to actually to attempt addition.
And we saw that actually crashes Python,
because it can't figure out what to do.
So there are a couple of,
different approaches to doing this.
So in this video I'm going to go through
and actually show you some of those.
So as you can see on the screen,
I have created a new project.
A Python project in IntelliJ
called string formating.
I also created a Python file using
the new command in IntelliJ so
that we can actually
start typing our code in.
So lets look at one way to
actually do what I suggested,
which is to actually display a string and
a number in the one print statement.
We're gonna use something
called the string function,
or str as it's correctly known.
So let's use that now.
Gonna type age = 24.
And I'm gonna do printMy age
is +, now I'm gonna do it the old way we
established in a previous video
didn't work just to recap.
So that method will actually
result in Python crashing.
So you can see on the right
hand side there, and
the reason it's crashing is it's actually
trying to concatenate or append a number.
We know that age is a number
because of this line here and
line two to a string, which of course
is something in double quotes.
We can use a method,
which is something that's brought
into Python called the STR method.
And type STR and put a bracket
around the age variable, like so.
And effectively what that is doing,
that line there is actually converting
what's in the brackets to a string.
So consequently when we run that,
we no longer get an error and
we actually get the correct result,
my age is 24 years.
So while other languages such as Java will
do this for you automatically, Java would
not have crashed in that scenario I showed
you on the screen where Python did.
In Python,
we actually need to do it specifically and
this is one way of doing it.
Now, you can probably imagine
if you had four, five,
or more numbers to actually print like
this that it could quickly rather tedious
to having to type that every time.
I'm trying to coerce every
variable using the STR method.
And fortunately for us, Python actually
provides a much better mechanism.
Now what I'm gonna do is, I'm gonna show
you something in Python called replacement
fields and this is gonna be a way that
makes it a lot easier to make changes like
this, when your dealing with
multiple numbers on the one line.
We're gonna do something
called replacement fields.
And later on I'm gonna start
talking about an old method
which was called a formating operator,
and we'll understand why shortly.
But for now, let's just get stuck
into showing you how to do this with
a replacement field.
And probably the best way to actually
explain it is actually to show
you an example of it.
So in the scenario of printing
as we did above we could do
what is equivalent using
these string str method.
We can type, My age is, and
notice I put curly brackets and a number,
the number zero in between them.
And I've typed years dot,
so type .format(age).
So what I've done there,
this is called a replacement field and
this is the actual replacement for
this part here.
So it's the syntax of it is
a curly brace at the start,
a number in the middle and
another curly brace to actually end it.
And that number,
which we'll talk about more shortly,
comes into play when we're actually
dealing with multiple parameters.
But we'll talk more
about that in a minute.
But now let's just run this example,
and we should get exactly
the same result as we got before.
Now it doesn't look to be a particularly
better way of doing things at the moment,
but where it really
starts coming in handy,
is if we've actually got a lot of data and
a lot of parameters.
So what i'm gonna do is I'm gonna
paste in a bit of code here and
I'm going to just actually make it so
it goes up to two lines so
we can actually see it a bit better.
Like so,
I'll just move this over a little bit.
So what we've got is, now we've got
one big string as you can see there,
that's just all one big string.
But notice how we've got
multiple replacement fields now.
So we've got the zero, the one, the,
two, the three, the four, the five,
the six, and the seven.
And in the past, in the previous
example we had doc format and
we only had just the one thing, the one
bit of information which was age, and
that went automatically into this position
here, into have a replacement for zero.
Now, we've actually got a total, if you
count them, one, two, three, four, five,
six, seven, eight.
And they're actually numbered from
zero to seven within the string.
So, what's gonna happen here is,
each one of these is going to be matched
up into the particular placement fields.
So, 31 should go into where it's got zero.
The replacement through zero generate
into number one, march into number two,
and so on.
And when we actually run this,
we should actually see that.
We're gonna open this out so
we can see the result.
There are 31 days in January, March,
May, July, August, October, December.
So I can see what happened, it actually
took those values It took the values in
the .format part of this line and actually
put them automatically in the right spot.
So that's the concept of a replacement
field as you can see, that it does
really make it a lot easier from the point
of view of putting your data together,
cuz we're putting all of the data that
we want outputted in the one place.
We're not having to put a bid here
like putting your plus str and
whatever the thing is that you want
to actually add to that spot as well.
So it's a lot easier to
actually process and work with.
That's the one, the replacement fields
is the new way of doing things.
And with that said,
we can actually make this better as well,
and there's nothing to stop
us from using triple quotes.
So for example, I can come back here and
I can paste in some more code and notice
I'm using the triple quotes again so
that we're actually dealing
with data on multiple lines.
And notice also, I'm reusing
a replacement field more than once.
So number two you can see is used
multiple times as is number one.
And number zero is also used once as well.
So now when we run that example you
can see we've got some data there.
What I might do is,
I might leave this window and then run one
window down to the bottom of the screen so
that we can see things
a little bit better.
Move to bottom.
It'd be a little bit easier for
us to actually read.
So, I'm just going to leave
a little bit of space there.
So you can see that it handles quite
nicely using the triple quotes
to deal with strings of handling
that go over to more than line,
multi-lines in other words.
And obviously compared to the approach
at the top of the line three.
That would be a huge long line to actually
have to type in if you were doing
like that and it would become quite messy.
So it's a great way to actually replace
things and do things in a better way.
And as I said that's being
introduced into Python 3.
Now there is another
way of doing things and
this is called the string
formatting operator.
I mentioned that briefly before and
I'm gonna show you how to use it,
despite the fact that it's now
being deprecated in Python 3.
And when I say deprecate,
what that actually means is that's a
feature that's a part of the program that
actually worked which is now no longer
recommended to be used in Python 3.
So it's introduce into Python 2, and
it's used extensively in Python 2 code.
And actually that's the reason why I'm
going to actually teach you some of this,
because the chances are gonna be high
as you move forward learning Python,
that you'll be getting
access to Python 2 code.
Because Python 2 has been out there for so
long, there's just a huge amount of code
out there and it's kinda pretty important
for you to actually see that and
understand how that works because
it's a fundamental pile for so
many Python 2 programs.
The other thing you'll be able
to do is once you see the way
that this formatting operator works.
If you decide to,
you'll be able to actually convert that
to the new replacement field syntax.
So let's just start from the basics,
and have a look how it works.
So what I'm going to do is start by
typing a formatting operator for
our first example, which was the age.
So print( My age is, and this time
we're doing it a little bit different,
we put %D years, And a percent sign
again and then whatever we want printed,
in this case, it would be the age
variable that we defined in line two.
Now that actually should
have been a lowercase d.
Like so,
it does actually make a difference.
So now if I run that we should find below
all those dates we should get the same
answer that we got when we printed
the example from line two.
And you can see that it still does
come up and says My age is 24 years.
This again is the old format.
So what actually happened
here is you can see
the %d actually got
replaced with an integer.
In the integer of course was a value
that was in the age variable.
So taking it to the next level, we could
actually do something like print, My age
is %d, I can also put %s.
%d, %s let me put a percent again.
This time we put because we've got
multiple things that we wanna print.
We can print those in brackets,
age, years,
six, months.
All right so, now if we actually run
that you can see that it comes up and
says, my age is 24 years, six months.
And you can see what happens is, the first
time it's come along, it's what my age is.
It's looked at the variable age and
so that needs to be 24 or
in this case I just put a 24 in there.
The next one was a %s,
s stands for string.
And so therefore let's put in the value,
in this case the years,
which was a literal
string that we typed in.
Put it in that spot and you can see that
it's done the same thing for the six and
the months as well.
So you can actually have
multiple replacements going on
in the one print line,
as you can see there.
So replacement's strictly one value at
a time, from left to right, and it's got
pretty well none of the flexibility
offered by Python 3 replacement fields.
So you should really be focusing on that,
replacement fields where possible.
But again, I'm showing you this
now just so you can look at
type Python 2 code at some point if you
need to, and understand how it works.
Now just to take that a little bit
further, let's look at another example and
that's using the for loop.
And we're going to use the for
loop one more time, bearing
in mind that we're going to cover the for
loop officially in the next section.
But for now,
let's just focus on the print statement.
So I'm going to type for, i, in range,
one comma 12, colon, print, number %2d.
And notice I put a number there this time,
squared is %4d and cubed is %4d.
Then for the answers I'm gonna put %i,
i, star, star, two, and
it sort of multiply in the previous video
the two stars together that indicates
that we're actually doing, we're trying to
raise a number to the power of another.
So i ** 2 in this case so
i ** 2 is i squared.
And the next one, I'm gonna do i **, or
to the power of, three like so,
gives us an answer that's i cubed.
Now if we actually run this and
actually have a look at the result
you can see on the output,
we've got things nicely formatted.
So the for loop's gone through and
done the processing for everything, and
in terms of printing out the numbers,
you can see how there's been
a certain amount of width that's
been allocated for each section.
So even though it didn't
need to use the letter, or
the space before the number 1 We actually
put the number in there, we said two,
use up to two, or to allocate two
spaces for this var actually working.
Consequently, it allocated that space and
just made it blank if it wasn't in use.
And as a result you can see that things
are nicely formatted and nicely in order.
And just to confirm that,
if we actually remove that and
run this without those numbers in there.
It does still work but
it doesn't look anywhere near as neat.
Yes, the first part does up until we've
got a number that's greater than nine.
Then you see it starts really losing
the actually formatting quite badly.
So I'm gonna put that back
to how it was before again.
Run it again so we've got some
nice formatting going on and
there's other types of operators
you can actually do there.
We've actually put %d,
is the one that's for
an integer and you saw %s before,
s plus four a string.
Now another thing you can actually do is
you can actually specify the precision of
a number as well.
So let's go ahead and actually do that.
And the way to do that, and
we can talk for example print pi is
approximately %12f.
And if type 22 divided by 7,
if you run that, you can
see by default we've got 3.142857.
And the calculation's actually
six decimal places wide.
But we can actually request more.
So we could change the format stream,
which we'll do now.
Let's change that, say, to 50.
So we'll come here where it's got 12f and
we'll change that to 12.50.
So we're saying that we want
a lot more precision there.
So if we do that and run that again.
You can see, we've now got a number
that literally has 50 decimal points.
So it's far more detailed, far more
precise than what the previous one was.
And it's just adding these numbers
in the various part of this,
after the percent sign and before
the actual type, which signifies and
actually shows where that
position is gonna be.
Whether it's gonna be
after the decimal point or
whether it's sort of a gap, in the number
to make sure that it lines up nicely.
So once again, the thing to keep in mind
is that you probably wont be using these
and you shouldn't be using
those in Python 3 generally.
And this is the string formating
operators I'm talking about,
these with the percent signs.
But it is important to understand them
because you almost certainly will
come across them in your Python codes.
And what I've in the screen now, I'm
gonna just open a browser and show you,
this page here and there's a link to
this page in the actual video itself.
So go to the resources section of this
video and you may have to come here and
actually find out more about
string formatting operators and
how they apply to the older version or
Python version 2.
By getting back to replacement fields,
what we've done here we can
pretty well do it identically and
more with replacement fields.
So let's try another example.
We're gonna copy the first part.
Like so, and then we're gonna actually
change it into, placed with some syntax.
So I'm gonna type zero
which we did before, but
I'm gonna but a colon and a number.
That's gonna be how wide.
We're actually allocating space four.
And likewise I can do 1:4 and
cubed, 2:4.
And instead of the percent which was
of course the old way of doing things,
we do type.format as we did earlier and
then we just have the same
parameters as they had before.
So when we run that we should
get an identical result but
using the new replacement field syntax.
You can see that we have
everything nicely formated.
Much as we had with the old approach but
obviously using the new
replacement field syntax.
Now, that's what's
specifying the width again.
So just to be clear, the first one
was the replacement for your number.
And that's which value from
this area after the .format is
actually used in which spot.
But the other part after that,
of course, was the width.
So colon two meant we allocated a width
of 2:4, we allocated a width of four, and
so on and so forth.
Now we can also tidy them
up a little bit though.
So what we can do is we can ensure that
numbers occupy the same field width but
are left aligned by placing a less
than sign after the symbol.
So what we can do there is, come down
here, we can leave the first one as it is,
but the second one, with the squared
result, we'll put less than four,
down here to two we put
less than four there.
If we actually run that,
notice how things are now left formatted.
We're still actually allocating
the same amount of space.
So things are still lined up but
effectively we're left justifying
the numbers so the number will always
start from the left hand side.
That's just another way
of doing things as well.
And what we could do for
the precision example coming back here.
We could actually just
copy the Pi result again.
So I'll copy that line,
put it down here and we could change that.
Where we had %12f, we could actually
delete that change it to replacement
fields format 0:12 to
add the precision .50.
So you can see that what you could do
with the old format in the new format
using replacement fields quite easily,
and change that of course to format.
And there's only the one parameter,
cuz it's only the one replacement
field that we're using.
And if we run that,
we get the same result with pi,
as you can see down on
the bottom of the screen.
So it's quite easy to convert
the old style modifiers,
as you saw me do in this video and replace
and convert those into the new .format or
the new replacement fields syntax.
The other thing I wanted to mention,
was two other things I wanted to mention
before we end this section and
I wanted to paste one example in here.
I'm not sure whether we made
it clear enough here, but
we can actually do something like this.
You see that we've used the actual
replacement numbers out of order for
the replacement fields.
So it doesn't have to start from zero,
one,
two and unlike the actual percentage
approach with these modifiers,
we can only use those once,
and they have to be in order.
In this case we can reuse
them multiple times.
So you can see here that we're actually
showing we're using a replacement field,
like number two was used
in multiple positions.
That's one of the other reasons
to use replacement fields.
And of course if you run it,
we'll see that it works quite nicely.
Now just in finishing off,
the other thing to note that in terms
of those numbers, keep in mind that
actually the use of numbers in
replacement fields are actually optional.
So we can actually do something
like this if we prefer And
you can see there I'm going
through the same range again, but
notice how I'm not actually inferring, or
not actually typing in a number at all.
So what will happen there is that will
automatically assume that the first one
you use will be zero, the second one will
be one, and the third one will be two.
So if we run that we'll see that.
And you can see we still
got the correct results.
And note how the third one,
even though we didn't specify a number,
we can still actually control the layout.
But of course in that scenario, what you
couldn't do is use the value more than
once, as we used in the example above,
because of course we need to
actually specify that number if we
aregonna use it more than once.
But in those situations where you don't
need to actually use something more than
once, this is probably gonna be ideal for
you, and
it's a little bit less to type as well.
Okay, so that's it, that's actually
the end of this section, so
we've actually looked at running
a simple hello world Python program.
And we talked a little
bit about variables, and
of course we mentioned the different types
of variables that are built into Python.
Went through discussing number data types,
heaps and floats etc., and
then talked about strings.
And we've now seen some basic operations
that can be performed on numbers and
strings.
We even talked about operator precedence.
And finally we finished off by slicing
using slicing to extract sub-strings,
put string operators on.
And of course, we covered in this video
how to actually format strings and
how to print strings and numbers together.
So in the next video
what we're gonna do is,
we're gonna start looking at statements
that allow us to control the flow
of a program, and also to repeat paths for
a program many times.
So, thanks for watching and
I'll see you in the next section.